
In Sikh tradition, a “Bunga” is a building or facility used for resting, meeting, and other community activities. The word "Bunga" itself is a Persian term for a hospice or dwelling place, and they had been incorporated by Sikhs to initially provide places to stay for Misldhars around Harmandir Sahib. However, they also developed to fulfil a variety of functions from fortifications to telling the time of day. The most popular purpose was to be centres of learning in a variety of subjects such as raag kirtan, medicine, calligraphy and much more. Fundamentally, a Bunga was a place where people could come together to discuss ideas and share knowledge. This page briefly explores the concept of Bunga, its historical context, and its relevance in Sikh literature and pilgrimage.

Taking this idea of Bungas as centres of learning, modern day versions can be positioned as the types of Sikh Spaces which prioritise education, research and disseminating knowledge amongst Sikhs. They are the schools, universities and think tanks of the Panth.  Given the modern-times, we should leverage the freedom technology has enabled to facilitate this function. Therefore, Bunga’s do not require a physical, tangible space or building to operate. They could exist as digital, online entities as well. Additionally, a Bunga does not have to be a distinct space from other types, and can be incorporated into other Sikh Spaces. For instance, a “Punjabi school” in Dharamsaals/Gurudwarai could be re-conceptualised as a Bunga. Alternatively, a Bunga could be a delocalised entity made up of members who partner with other Sikh Spaces to use their facilities as needed. 

A Bunga is a relatively flexible type of Sikh Space and should serve to provide a platform for the Sikh intelligentsia of today. 